# Golang

Golang is a fast, compiled, garbage-collected, concurrent systems programming language. Golang was created as a future-proof language to meet the challenges of the present and anticipate challenges of the future.

Advantages:
- Compiles large projects within a few seconds
- Open source by nature so defects will be detected and eliminated faster
- Fast since it has simple structure and syntax. It is devoid of classes and type inheritance. The language is based on functions, so it is simple and fast to learn. It’s compiled so it provides faster feedback, shorter time to market, and saves time and money.  It’s simple, so it is more maintainable, and development is faster and cheaper.
- Concurrent in nature with the help of goroutines, channels, and garbage collection
- Cross-platform
- Statically typed so developers have to be more accurate and attentive, so the code is neater and safer

Disadvantages:
- Less flexible copared to other dynamically typed languages
- Lack of 3rd party modules
- Differs a lot from C-based languages
- Has no generics (generics allow writing code which can be reusable - it saves time and effort in some cases)

## Commands

### go build

- Compiles packages and dependencies
- Go build ignores files whose names start with `_` or `.`
- By default the executable will be generated in the same folder. If you want the file to be generated in `$GOPATH/bin` then use `go install` instead
- `go build` will compile all the files in the folder, if you just want to compile one file then use `go build <file_path>`

### go clean

- Cleans files that are generated by compilers
- Do this before pushing a commit to Github

### go fmt

- Enforces go code formatting to the project. It will rewrite the source files after formatting code

### go get

- Fetches remote packages. Currently only supports BitBucket, Github, Google Code, and Launchpad
- Does the following actions: downloads the source code, then executes `go install`

### go install

- Compiles all packages and generates files, then moves them to `$GOPATH/pkg` or `$GOPATH/bin`

### go test

- Loads all files whose name include `*_test.go` and generates test files, then prints information about the test results
- Tests all your test files by default

### go fix

- Upgrades from an older version to newer version of golang

### go list

- Lists all installed packages

### go run

- Compiles temporary files and run the application

## Basic Knowledge

25 keywords:
```
break    default      func    interface    select
case     defer        go      map          struct
chan     else         goto    package      switch
const    fallthrough  if      range        type
continue for          import  return       var
```

Go programs are composed by `package`. `package main` tells us that this package will be compiled to a program instead of package files whose extensions are `.a`.

Every executable program has one and only one `main` package, and you need an entry function called `main` without any arguments or return values in the `main` package.

The way to think about packages in Go is `modularity` (break up program into many modules) and `reusability` (every module can be reused by many programs).

Each go file is in some package, and that package should be a distinct folder in the GOPATH, but main is a special package which doesn't require a `main` folder. 

Conclusion: Go uses `package` (like modules in Python) to organize programs. The function `main.main()` is the entry point of any program. Go standardizes language and most of the programming methodology (gofmt).
